# dataincubator

This folder contains the figures and proposal for the Data Incubator semi-final round. I plan to make code and data available once time allows. 

Proposal: 

Data Incubator Semi-Final Challenge, Part 3: Exploratory Analyses with the CDC's National Survey of Family Growth 

Becoming a parent requires making a myriad of decisions regarding pregnancy, birth, and child-rearing in infancy. Parents and parents-to-be are bombarded with information from friends, family, and medical professionals on how to best birth, feed, and care for their children. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) routinely updates their recommendations regarding safe and healthy child-rearing decisions with the aim to maximize the health and outcomes of infants. Yet parents still seek information and advice from people who are not medical professionals in making their parenting decisions. I aim to explore how parents from different social groups make parenting decisions and how these decisions have been affected by AAP recommendations over time.  

I propose a project using the CDC’s National Survey of Family Growth, combining results across several decades (for the proposal, I have focused just on data from 2011-2013 and 2013-2015). This project administered questionnaires to women every week over the course of each time period on sexual history, pregnancy, birth outcomes, and infancy. I will examine how factors like age, socioeconomic status, and race affect women’s decisions about pregnancy, birth child-rearing. Further, I will investigate how changes in recommendations from the AAP have affected parenting decisions in different social groups over time. 

My preliminary analyses and data visualization focus on breastfeeding rates. There is ample evidence that breastfeeding for any length of time has significant health benefits for infants, particularly those that are premature or ill. My findings reveal that mothers living below the poverty line are less likely to breastfeed their infants than mothers that live above the poverty line. Further, when mothers in poverty do breastfeed, they tend to do so for fewer weeks than mothers not living in poverty. I also demonstrate that breastfeeding rates are increasing across these groups, potentially due to repeated reaffirmations from the AAP, with the greatest spike in breastfeeding rates occurring after the AAP issued a press release supporting breastfeeding in 2012.  I also demonstrate that other social factors - education, age, and race - are significantly related to breastfeeding rates; age and education positively predict breastfeeding rates. Further, mothers’ identifying as white or other are significantly more likely to breastfeed than mothers identifying as black. 

For my analyses, I use mixed effects regression models. These models allow me to account for other factors that may be contributing to differences in my outcome variables in order to hone in on how each specific factor affects breastfeeding. These models also have predictive power to help us understand how likely an individual is to breastfeed based on the social and demographic groups that she is part of. 

Understanding these data will uncover differences in parenting decisions by social group, and will highlight which communities are underserved with respect to AAP recommendations. By highlighting social groups that are typically not adhering to AAP recommendations, health care providers and policy makers will know how to target initiatives and legislation towards these particular groups. Additionally, results from these data will be of use to parents and parents-to-be as a source of information regarding how their peer groups are making parenting decisions. 
